---
subject: Order dt. 30.06.2018 u/Sec 119 of the Income Tax Act extending time for linking PAN with aadhaar
---
To,

The Chairman
Central Board of Direct Taxes (CBDT)
Ministry of Finance
Dept. of Revenue, North Block
ITA II Division New Delhi - 110001

Email: chairmancbdt@nic.in

Respected Sir,

SUB: Seeking reassurance regarding the safety of personal information and data
protection in the context of the Order dt. 30.06.2018 u/Sec 119 of the Income
Tax Act extending time for linking PAN with aadhaar

1. This is regarding the order mandating that the aadhaar number be provided
while filing returns; and PAN card holders to link the aadhaar number with their
PAN.
 
2. We are writing to you to request a reconsideration of your order dated
30.06.2018, passed under Section 119 of the Income Tax Act, 1961 [Hereinafter
referred to as the “Income Tax Act”] through which the Central Board of Direct
Taxes [Hereinafter referred to as the “CBDT”] has extended time for linking PAN
with Aadhaar till 31.03.2019. It is requested that your office rescind the
orders mandating linking PAN with Aadhaar, or, in the alternative, extend the
time for linking PAN with Aadhaar until such time sufficient safeguards are put
in place to protect the rights and interests of tax payers, including, and
especially, the fundamental right to privacy which the Supreme Court has
recognised as an intrinsic part of the fundamental rights contained in Part III
of the Constitution, and including the right to dignity.

3. In September 2018, the Supreme Court upheld section 139AA of the Income Tax
Act which requires the linking of the aadhaar number to income tax returns and
PAN card. The majority judgment accepted the statement of counsel for the
respondents that aadhaar is an impeccable identity, that no duplicates exist,
that it reflects the identity of each person accurately. On matters of security
of data, the court only considered the UIDAI and accepted the powerpoint
presentation made by the CEO of the UIDAI that it is secure. The majority
judgment also acknowledged that there was no data protection law yet in place,
and that that must be remedied.


4. Significantly, therefore, the court’s partial imprimatur to the aadhaar
programme, and to Section 139AA of the Income Tax Act, through its judgment
dated 26.09.2018 (Puttaswamy II), also recognised the inviolability of the right
to privacy. The judgment does not validate the methods employed in linking
Aadhaar with PAN but merely holds such linking to be constitutionally valid
subject to such linking being in conformity, among other things, with the
various principles of privacy that the 9-judge bench of the court recognised
unanimously in August 2017, in JusticeK.S.Puttaswamy(Retd) v. Union of India
(Puttaswamy I).

5. Since the date of the judgment, many events have transpired that raise
questions about the aadhaar project, and the validity of aadhaar as a secure and
robust identity. Let me set out some of them illustratively:

a. The State Bank of India has alleged misuse and wrongful generation of aadhaar
numbers. A report on January 29, 2019 explained the manner in which the fraud
was being committed, raising concerns about fake numbers being generated by the
project. State Bank of India, it may be recalled, has been directed by the UIDAI
(as have other banks, see
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/banks-without-stipulated-number-of-aadhaar-centres-will-face-rs-20000-fine-from-october/articleshow/60376996.cms)
to set up enrolment centres in at least 10% of their branches, and to do a
certain number of enrolments everyday on pain of penalty
(https://www.thehindu.com/business/Industry/aadhaar-authentication-13-banks-fined-face-penalties/article24835382.ece
, August 31, 2018).  See
https://economictimes.indiatimes.com/industry/banking/finance/banking/sbi-alleges-aadhaar-data-misuse-uidai-rubbishes-charge/articleshow/67734688.cms

b. A single judge of the Calcutta High Court, in the matter of Debashis Nandy
v. Union of India in judgment dated January 3, 2019, was confronted with a case
where the father’s name had been falsely entered when demographic information
was collected at the time of enrolment. His finding in the case is that the
Supreme Court judgment does not deal with the authenticity of demographic data,
and, in fact, demographic information is unverified, and that “there is
definitely something amiss with the aadhaar enrolment process if important
demographic information such as the name of the applicant’s father, as the case
in hand, can be falsified and even go undetected.” The judgment records that
“the Learned Additional Solicitor General submitted that no verification is
sought as regards such information and the application is processed on the basis
of the bare information provided by the applicants in their application.” The
ease with which false identities can be created is the central aspect of this
judgment. See
https://drive.google.com/viewerng/viewer?url=https://www.livelaw.in/pdf_upload/pdf_upload-357113.pdf

c. This is a problem with the aadhaar system that has also been acknowledged by
a Division Bench of the Lucknow Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the matter
of Smt Parvati Kumari v. State of UP in judgment dated January 9, 2019. In this
case, the court held: “We clearly deduce from the above that the other
information namely name, date of birth, gender and address as entered in the
Aadhaar Card, is furnished by the Aadhaar applicant at the time of
authentication/enrolment. Although, the regulations provide for the applicant to
rely on a set of documents for giving information in regard to name, address and
proof of date of birth, however, because the said information is merely given by
the applicant, and is not authenticated by UIDAI at the time of authentication,
the Aadhaar Card cannot be conclusive proof in regard to those entries.” The
only connection that can be established, according to the High Court, is the
biometric information collected and the aadhaar number. See
https://www.livelaw.in/top-stories/aadhar-entries-not-conclusive-proofs-allahabad-hc-142428


d. In the meantime, biometric fraud has surfaced on several occasions. A recent
incident is reported at
https://www.indiatimes.com/trending/wtf/hackers-use-aadhaar-biometrics-to-rob-a-man-s-account-whose-job-is-to-issue-aadhaar-cards-361274.html

and

https://www.huffingtonpost.in/entry/aadhar-biometrics-theft-case-police-arrests-victims-close-friend_in_5c5f2788e4b0eec79b23f356

e. The vulnerability of the UID data base, and of the various databases in which
the number has been seeded, has again been revealed.

On January 25, 2019, it was reported that fake voter IDs had been created by
Telengana Congress to make a point about the shortcomings in the voter
registration system. “All one needs is to create a duplicate Aadhaar card of a
person and use a house address which has an electricity bill. The photo and
details can be sourced from Whatsapp or from social media accounts, it’s that
simple. No one will verify if the Voter ID is genuine or fake,” explained the
Congress worker who created the bogus card. See
https://www.thenewsminute.com/article/anyone-can-fake-it-telangana-congress-workers-forge-voter-ids-election-officers-95659

More recently, on 26 February, 2019, the Times of India reported that the UIDAI
has launched a massive probe into a complaint filed regarding alleged privacy
breach and misuse of data of 3.7 crore voters in Andhra Pradesh. The problem has
been exacerbated by the seeding of the aadhaar number in various databases,
including in this case the Smart Pulse Survey and the State Resident Data Hub,
which contain demographic data in the UID database and in the electoral
rolls. “The app has voter ID numbers, names, colour photos, booth-level
information, family details, caste information and government schemes and
amounts a voter gets as beneficiary. The app comes with all the information
inbuilt and is extensively used by TDP activists”, the report says. It says that
investigation is on to find out how the company, IT Grids (India) obtained
family details and beneficiary data. See
https://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/india/tdp-app-breached-data-of-3-7cr-voters-probe-begins/articleshow/68160839.cms


The vulnerability of the data in the aadhaar system was acknowledged by the
UIDAI in a press release in February 2018, when the “CEO, UIDAI advised people
to be watchful for the protection of their privacy and recommended not to share
their Aadhaar number or personal details to unauthorized agencies for getting it
laminated, or printed on plastic card.”  See

http://pib.nic.in/PressReleaseIframePage.aspx?PRID=1519253

This caution extends, as is now evident, more generally, and in situations
beyond the control of the individual.

f. A recent RTI reply from the UIDAI has revealed an astonishing fact: that the
UIDAI does not have a Chief Information Security Officer. See
https://www.moneylife.in/article/aadhaar-truth-uidai-never-appointed-a-chief-information-security-officer-reveals-rti/56267.html


g. Breaches of various databases holding aadhaar numbers have been reported
since the judgment, other than the Telengana breach cited above, and including

on 19 February, 2019, at https://techcrunch.com/2019/02/18/aadhaar-indane-leak/
(Indane gas company leaks - it is estimated that over 6.7 million customers
could be affected) end January 2019, at
https://techcrunch.com/2019/01/31/aadhaar-data-leak/ (Jharkhand government web
site) at the World Economic Forum, the Global Risk Report 2019 named aadhaar as
having suffered multiple breaches, compromising over 1.1 billion people. See the
report dated 19 February 2019 at

https://www.moneylife.in/article/aadhaar-data-breach-largest-in-the-world-says-wefs-global-risk-report-and-avast/56384.html

Another report by Avast Software made a similar assessment. Both had Rachna
Khaira’s investigative report for the Tribune for reference, but seem to have
found reason to endorse it. The assessment also seems to point to `lax
cybersecurity protocols’ as the possible reason for the breaches. That the UIDAI
routinely denies leaks from its database, even when it has had to blacklist
operatives, launch investigations, penalise connected persons, is part of the
problem.

h. A 20 January, 2019 report about the problem with getting rations because of
the need for biometric authentication is a

https://www.firstpost.com/india/failure-of-a-biometric-machine-leaves-this-up-village-stranded-for-ration-5975641.html

In this case, it was a problem of connectivity, which is why a whole village
found itself stranded.

i. There are further reports of the police demanding from housing societies
“complete information of their residents” including details of their voter ID,
PAN card, aadhaar, phone number, vehicle number, email address, blood group,
driving licence number, 2 passport size photographs and more. (By police notice
from the office of the Police Inspector, KP Agarahara Police Station, Bangalore
City, dated 28 January, 2019, No. KPAPS/CC/2019.)

The Regional Office in Bangalore of the EPFO continues to demand the aadhaar
number, even as recently as 7 February 2019, despite the Supreme Court judgment
which renders this illegal.

Since the judgment on September 26, 2018, information gathered from Fact Finding
Reports and in the media shockingly reveals at least 12 further deaths where the
poor have not been able to access their basic entitlements including ration and
pension.  This is despite the assurance given to the court by the Attorney
General that “no deserving person would be denied the benefit of a scheme on the
failure of authentication”. (at p.554 of the majority judgment)

This wide range of evidence has raised serious concerns about potential loss of
identity, fraud including identity fraud, and privacy. This is apart from the
deeply problematic nature of both the manner in which enrolments have happened
and continue to happen (see the SBI complaint, supra).

This is why I am writing to you asking that there be no linking of the income
tax returns, and the PAN card, to the aadhaar number. In any event, such a move
should be held off till the questions raised are answered, and the
vulnerabilities of the system, and of the individual, are satisfactorily dealt
with.


6. We would also draw your attention to the judgment of the Supreme Court which
accepted the logic of linking aadhaar and PAN, but not while doing away with the
right to privacy. The court accepted the government’s averment that it would
serve a legitimate state aim, and so there can be inroads made into the right to
privacy, if the doctrine of proportionality is met. There was already a law, but
that law only mandated the linking of PAN and aadhaar, and aadhaar and income
tax returns. It did not provide any manner of data protection. The government
left it to the government to pass a Data Protection Law that would pass the test
of protecting people’s rights and interests. That has not yet happened.

In its absence, we draw your attention to the report of the Group of Experts on
Privacy constituted by the Planning Commission, under the chairmanship of
Justice AP Shah, and whose report was presented to the government in October
2012. The report enunciated nine clear principles (“privacy principles).

 These are, one, a requirement that the any data collector provide a simple
 notice of the information collected to all individuals, in clear and concise
 language, prior to the collection of such information; two, that a data
 controller ought to give individuals a choice with regard to providing their
 personal information, and take individual consent only after providing notice
 of its information practices; three, that only such information as is necessary
 for an identified purpose be collected; four, that data collected ought to be
 adequate and relevant to the purposes for which they are processed; five, that
 individuals ought to be allowed access to personal information about them held
 by the collecting authority; six, that it be made mandatory that information
 collected is only disclosed to third parties after notice and informed consent
 is obtained; seven, that the collection and processing of the information is
 done in a manner that protects against loss, unauthorized access, destruction,
 use, storage, etc; eight, that a data processor ought to take all necessary
 steps to implement practices, procedures, policies and systems in a manner
 proportional to the scale, scope, and sensitivity to the data that is collected
 and processed; and nine, that clear mechanisms be put in place to implement
 privacy policies, including tools, training, and education; and external and
 internal audits. For a more detailed reading of the report, see
 http://planningcommission.nic.in/reports/genrep/rep_privacy.pdf

It is of the utmost importance to acknowledge that data protection is not just
about protecting data, but about protecting the person whose data it is.


7. These privacy principles have since been memorialised through the judgment of
the Supreme Court in Puttaswamy I (the Privacy judgment), and the holding that
the linking of Aadhaar with PAN is constitutionally valid is subject to the
measures taken for the said purpose being compliant with these essential
principles.

8. Parliament has not enacted such a law. When it is enacted, it will have to be
tested to ensure it meets the standards set by the privacy judgment, which was
rendered unanimously by a bench of nine judges. Till then,

and given the state of demographic information in the UIDAI database the wide
range of places where the number has been linked/seeded the regularity of data
breaches the absence of a Chief Information Security Officer in the UIDAI the
repeated cases of biometric failure and of biometric fraud the probability of
inorganic seeding, which takes consent away from the individual, and which must
be struck down if any further seeding is to be allowed (see p.2 at
https://pdsportal.nic.in/Files/Aadhar%20seeding%20guidelines.pdf) that the
deletion of the aadhaar number from various databases where it had been wrongly
seeded such as in banks and with mobile service providers has not yet happened
despite the judgment of the Supreme Court and, most importantly, given that the
PAN number is required to be handed over to a multiplicity of agencies – at a
quick count, that would be about 15 agencies,

we request that you

suspend the linking of the aadhaar number with the PAN card, and remove the
requirement of providing the aadhaar number while filing income tax returns till
the problems stated above are addressed.

In any event, since as a data controller you are responsible for data
protection, kindly let us know

how the data will be stored how the data will be/is being processed, what
security measures have been taken to prevent the breach of the data base,
protect personal information, ensure that there is no unauthorised transfer how
the data will be stored the purposes for which it will be used, and what
measures have been taken to ensure that it is not used for any other purpose how
you will detect that it has been used for a purpose other than that for which it
is collected how the breach of our data will be communicated to us what action
will be taken in the event of a breach whose is the liability when there is a
leak, transfer or inorganic seeding of the aadhaar number what is the extent,
and forms, of liability in the event that there is a data breach which companies
are involved in collecting, storing, processing and dealing with the data in any
way, and what measures are in place to protect our data, and our privacy? This
is is especially important since there is no data protection law.


9. If a system, and process, have not been set up that addresses the concerns
raised, and given the perilous consequences that could ensue, and in the absence
of a proper mechanism to check data breaches, in the absence of a mechanism
providing for remedies for such breaches, and in the absence of the Income Tax
Department accepting any liability for such breaches, it is our request that
your order mandating the linking of aadhaar and PAN be rescinded.

10. In any event, the linking of Aadhaar and PAN is a superfluous exercise has
become clear from two recent judgments, one by the Calcutta High Court and the
other by the Lucknow bench of the Allahabad High Court. The latter specifically
holds that “if a person relies on Aadhaar entries as proof of address and date
of birth, these cannot be considered conclusive proof under the Evidence Act.”

11. Ultimately, both in Puttaswamy I and Puttaswamy II, the Hon’ble Supreme
Court has recognised the cardinal principle that a data processor ought to take
all necessary steps to ensure that any data collected is proportional to the
purpose for which it is being collected. We therefore request you to provide to
us the details of how the information submitted in lieu of Aadhaar being linked
with PAN is being processed, how this information is being stored, and the full
nature and extent of protections that you have presently put in place to ensure
that this information is safe and secure. We also respectfully call upon you to
provide to us specific details with respect to the remedies that you offer in
the event of a breach of data and the extent to which the Income Tax Department
will accept liability on account of such breaches.

12. Also, we draw your attention to section 2(k) of the Aadhaar (Targeted
Delivery of Financial and other Subsidies, Benefits and Services) Act 2016,
where `demographic information’ expressly excludes information concerning
`income’. Linking the aadhaar number with income tax returns and with the PAN
card takes away this protection. Kindly inform us how this information will be
maintained in a silo once the aadhaar number is linked.

13. Finally, we wish to bring to your kind attention that the Hon’ble Supreme
Court’s directions in Puttaswamy II are yet to be complied with both by the
State and by private entities. The State too has failed to enact a data
protection law. Therefore, to insist on the linking of Aadhaar and PAN at this
juncture is, at the very least, premature.

We, therefore, request you to kindly withdraw your order mandating the linking
of PAN and Aadhaar, or, in the alternative, extend the deadline for the linking
of the two until such time sufficient safeguards are installed to protect our
fundamental right to privacy.  We consider that a White Paper on IT-PAN linking
with aadhaar should be issued urgently, especially since many people have been
compelled to link the number already, and the protection of their data is
opaque.

We also request you to respond to the queries raised in this missive, so we may
know our rights and remedies, as also how to protect our privacy interests.



Yours Sincerely,

